Chapter 6
About this time an ambitious young reporter
from New York arrived one morning at Gatsby’s
door and asked him if he had anything to say.
“Anything to say about what?” inquired
Gatsby politely.
“Why — any statement to give out.”
It transpired after a confused five minutes
that the man had heard Gatsby’s name around
his office in a connection which he either
wouldn’t reveal or didn’t fully understand.
This was his day off and with laudable initiative
he had hurried out “to see.”
It was a random shot, and yet the reporter’s
instinct was right. Gatsby’s notoriety,
spread about by the hundreds who had accepted
his hospitality and so become authorities
on his past, had increased all summer until
he fell just short of being news. Contemporary
legends such as the “underground pipe-line
to Canada” attached themselves to him, and
there was one persistent story that he didn’t
live in a house at all, but in a boat that
looked like a house and was moved secretly
up and down the Long Island shore. Just why
these inventions were a source of satisfaction
to James Gatz of North Dakota, isn’t easy
to say.
James Gatz — that was really, or at least
legally, his name. He had changed it at the
age of seventeen and at the specific moment
that witnessed the beginning of his career
— when he saw Dan Cody’s yacht drop anchor
over the most insidious flat on Lake Superior.
It was James Gatz who had been loafing along
the beach that afternoon in a torn green jersey
and a pair of canvas pants, but it was already
Jay Gatsby who borrowed a rowboat, pulled
out to the Tuolomee, and informed Cody that
a wind might catch him and break him up in
half an hour.
I suppose he’d had the name ready for a
long time, even then. His parents were shiftless
and unsuccessful farm people — his imagination
had never really accepted them as his parents
at all. The truth was that Jay Gatsby of West
Egg, Long Island, sprang from his Platonic
conception of himself. He was a son of God
— a phrase which, if it means anything,
means just that — and he must be about His
Father’s business, the service of a vast,
vulgar, and meretricious beauty. So he invented
just the sort of Jay Gatsby that a seventeen-year-old
boy would be likely to invent, and to this
conception he was faithful to the end.
For over a year he had been beating his way
along the south shore of Lake Superior as
a clam-digger and a salmon-fisher or in any
other capacity that brought him food and bed.
His brown, hardening body lived naturally
through the half-fierce, half-lazy work of
the bracing days. He knew women early, and
since they spoiled him he became contemptuous
of them, of young virgins because they were
ignorant, of the others because they were
hysterical about things which in his overwhelming
self-absorbtion he took for granted.
But his heart was in a constant, turbulent
riot. The most grotesque and fantastic conceits
haunted him in his bed at night. A universe
of ineffable gaudiness spun itself out in
his brain while the clock ticked on the wash-stand
and the moon soaked with wet light his tangled
clothes upon the floor. Each night he added
to the pattern of his fancies until drowsiness
closed down upon some vivid scene with an
oblivious embrace. For a while these reveries
provided an outlet for his imagination; they
were a satisfactory hint of the unreality
of reality, a promise that the rock of the
world was founded securely on a fairy’s
wing.
An instinct toward his future glory had led
him, some months before, to the small Lutheran
college of St. Olaf in southern Minnesota.
He stayed there two weeks, dismayed at its
ferocious indifference to the drums of his
destiny, to destiny itself, and despising
the janitor’s work with which he was to
pay his way through. Then he drifted back
to Lake Superior, and he was still searching
for something to do on the day that Dan Cody’s
yacht dropped anchor in the shallows alongshore.
Cody was fifty years old then, a product of
the Nevada silver fields, of the Yukon, of
every rush for metal since seventy-five. The
transactions in Montana copper that made him
many times a millionaire found him physically
robust but on the verge of soft-mindedness,
and, suspecting this, an infinite number of
women tried to separate him from his money.
The none too savory ramifications by which
Ella Kaye, the newspaper woman, played Madame
de Maintenon to his weakness and sent him
to sea in a yacht, were common knowledge to
the turgid sub-journalism of 1902. He had
been coasting along all too hospitable shores
for five years when he turned up as James
Gatz’s destiny at Little Girls Point.
To the young Gatz, resting on his oars and
looking up at the railed deck, the yacht represented
all the beauty and glamour in the world. I
suppose he smiled at Cody — he had probably
discovered that people liked him when he smiled.
At any rate Cody asked him a few questions
(one of them elicited the brand new name)
and found that he was quick and extravagantly
ambitious. A few days later he took him to
Duluth and bought him a blue coat, six pair
of white duck trousers, and a yachting cap.
And when the Tuolomee left for the West Indies
and the Barbary Coast Gatsby left too.
He was employed in a vague personal capacity
— while he remained with Cody he was in
turn steward, mate, skipper, secretary, and
even jailor, for Dan Cody sober knew what
lavish doings Dan Cody drunk might soon be
about, and he provided for such contingencies
by reposing more and more trust in Gatsby.
The arrangement lasted five years, during
which the boat went three times around the
Continent. It might have lasted indefinitely
except for the fact that Ella Kaye came on
board one night in Boston and a week later
Dan Cody inhospitably died.
I remember the portrait of him up in Gatsby’s
bedroom, a gray, florid man with a hard, empty
face — the pioneer debauchee, who during
one phase of American life brought back to
the Eastern seaboard the savage violence of
the frontier brothel and saloon. It was indirectly
due to Cody that Gatsby drank so little. Sometimes
in the course of gay parties women used to
rub champagne into his hair; for himself he
formed the habit of letting liquor alone.
And it was from Cody that he inherited money
— a legacy of twenty-five thousand dollars.
He didn’t get it. He never understood the
legal device that was used against him, but
what remained of the millions went intact
to Ella Kaye. He was left with his singularly
appropriate education; the vague contour of
Jay Gatsby had filled out to the substantiality
of a man.
He told me all this very much later, but I’ve
put it down here with the idea of exploding
those first wild rumors about his antecedents,
which weren’t even faintly true. Moreover
he told it to me at a time of confusion, when
I had reached the point of believing everything
and nothing about him. So I take advantage
of this short halt, while Gatsby, so to speak,
caught his breath, to clear this set of misconceptions
away.
It was a halt, too, in my association with
his affairs. For several weeks I didn’t
see him or hear his voice on the phone — mostly
I was in New York, trotting around with Jordan
and trying to ingratiate myself with her senile
aunt — but finally I went over to his house
one Sunday afternoon. I hadn’t been there
two minutes when somebody brought Tom Buchanan
in for a drink. I was startled, naturally,
but the really surprising thing was that it
hadn’t happened before.
They were a party of three on horseback — Tom
and a man named Sloane and a pretty woman
in a brown riding-habit, who had been there
previously.
“I’m delighted to see you,” said Gatsby,
standing on his porch. “I’m delighted
that you dropped in.”
As though they cared!
“Sit right down. Have a cigarette or a cigar.”
He walked around the room quickly, ringing
bells. “I’ll have something to drink for
you in just a minute.”
He was profoundly affected by the fact that
Tom was there. But he would be uneasy anyhow
until he had given them something, realizing
in a vague way that that was all they came
for. Mr. Sloane wanted nothing. A lemonade?
No, thanks. A little champagne? Nothing at
all, thanks. . . . I’m sorry ——
“Did you have a nice ride?”
“Very good roads around here.”
“I suppose the automobiles ——”
“Yeah.”
Moved by an irresistible impulse, Gatsby turned
to Tom, who had accepted the introduction
as a stranger.
“I believe we’ve met somewhere before,
Mr. Buchanan.”
“Oh, yes,” said Tom, gruffly polite, but
obviously not remembering. “So we did. I
remember very well.”
“About two weeks ago.”
“That’s right. You were with Nick here.”
“I know your wife,” continued Gatsby,
almost aggressively.
“That so?”
Tom turned to me.
“You live near here, Nick?”
“Next door.”
“That so?”
Mr. Sloane didn’t enter into the conversation,
but lounged back haughtily in his chair; the
woman said nothing either — until unexpectedly,
after two highballs, she became cordial.
“We’ll all come over to your next party,
Mr. Gatsby,” she suggested. “What do you
say?”
“Certainly; I’d be delighted to have you.”
“Be ver’ nice,” said Mr. Sloane, without
gratitude. “Well — think ought to be starting
home.”
“Please don’t hurry,” Gatsby urged them.
He had control of himself now, and he wanted
to see more of Tom. “Why don’t you — why
don’t you stay for supper? I wouldn’t
be surprised if some other people dropped
in from New York.”
“You come to supper with me,” said the
lady enthusiastically. “Both of you.”
This included me. Mr. Sloane got to his feet.
“Come along,” he said — but to her only.
“I mean it,” she insisted. “I’d love
to have you. Lots of room.”
Gatsby looked at me questioningly. He wanted
to go, and he didn’t see that Mr. Sloane
had determined he shouldn’t.
“I’m afraid I won’t be able to,” I
said.
“Well, you come,” she urged, concentrating
on Gatsby.
Mr. Sloane murmured something close to her
ear.
“We won’t be late if we start now,”
she insisted aloud.
“I haven’t got a horse,” said Gatsby.
“I used to ride in the army, but I’ve
never bought a horse. I’ll have to follow
you in my car. Excuse me for just a minute.”
The rest of us walked out on the porch, where
Sloane and the lady began an impassioned conversation
aside.
“My God, I believe the man’s coming,”
said Tom. “Doesn’t he know she doesn’t
want him?”
“She says she does want him.”
“She has a big dinner party and he won’t
know a soul there.” He frowned. “I wonder
where in the devil he met Daisy. By God, I
may be old-fashioned in my ideas, but women
run around too much these days to suit me.
They meet all kinds of crazy fish.”
Suddenly Mr. Sloane and the lady walked down
the steps and mounted their horses.
“Come on,” said Mr. Sloane to Tom, “we’re
late. We’ve got to go.” And then to me:
“Tell him we couldn’t wait, will you?”
Tom and I shook hands, the rest of us exchanged
a cool nod, and they trotted quickly down
the drive, disappearing under the August foliage
just as Gatsby, with hat and light overcoat
in hand, came out the front door.
Tom was evidently perturbed at Daisy’s running
around alone, for on the following Saturday
night he came with her to Gatsby’s party.
Perhaps his presence gave the evening its
peculiar quality of oppressiveness — it
stands out in my memory from Gatsby’s other
parties that summer. There were the same people,
or at least the same sort of people, the same
profusion of champagne, the same many-colored,
many-keyed commotion, but I felt an unpleasantness
in the air, a pervading harshness that hadn’t
been there before. Or perhaps I had merely
grown used to it, grown to accept West Egg
as a world complete in itself, with its own
standards and its own great figures, second
to nothing because it had no consciousness
of being so, and now I was looking at it again,
through Daisy’s eyes. It is invariably saddening
to look through new eyes at things upon which
you have expended your own powers of adjustment.
They arrived at twilight, and, as we strolled
out among the sparkling hundreds, Daisy’s
voice was playing murmurous tricks in her
throat.
“These things excite me so,” she whispered.
“If you want to kiss me any time during
the evening, Nick, just let me know and I’ll
be glad to arrange it for you. Just mention
my name. Or present a green card. I’m giving
out green ——”
“Look around,” suggested Gatsby.
“I’m looking around. I’m having a marvelous
——”
“You must see the faces of many people you’ve
heard about.”
Tom’s arrogant eyes roamed the crowd.
“We don’t go around very much,” he said.
“In fact, I was just thinking I don’t
know a soul here.”
“Perhaps you know that lady.” Gatsby indicated
a gorgeous, scarcely human orchid of a woman
who sat in state under a white plum tree.
Tom and Daisy stared, with that peculiarly
unreal feeling that accompanies the recognition
of a hitherto ghostly celebrity of the movies.
“She’s lovely,” said Daisy.
“The man bending over her is her director.”
He took them ceremoniously from group to group:
“Mrs. Buchanan . . . and Mr. Buchanan ——” After
an instant’s hesitation he added: “the
polo player.”
“Oh no,” objected Tom quickly, “not
me.”
But evidently the sound of it pleased Gatsby,
for Tom remained “the polo player” for
the rest of the evening.
“I’ve never met so many celebrities!”
Daisy exclaimed. “I liked that man — what
was his name? — with the sort of blue nose.”
Gatsby identified him, adding that he was
a small producer.
“Well, I liked him anyhow.”
“I’d a little rather not be the polo player,”
said Tom pleasantly, “I’d rather look
at all these famous people in — in oblivion.”
Daisy and Gatsby danced. I remember being
surprised by his graceful, conservative fox-trot
— I had never seen him dance before. Then
they sauntered over to my house and sat on
the steps for half an hour, while at her request
I remained watchfully in the garden. “In
case there’s a fire or a flood,” she explained,
“or any act of God.”
Tom appeared from his oblivion as we were
sitting down to supper together. “Do you
mind if I eat with some people over here?”
he said. “A fellow’s getting off some
funny stuff.”
“Go ahead,” answered Daisy genially, “and
if you want to take down any addresses here’s
my little gold pencil.” . . . she looked
around after a moment and told me the girl
was “common but pretty,” and I knew that
except for the half-hour she’d been alone
with Gatsby she wasn’t having a good time.
We were at a particularly tipsy table. That
was my fault — Gatsby had been called to
the phone, and I’d enjoyed these same people
only two weeks before. But what had amused
me then turned septic on the air now.
“How do you feel, Miss Baedeker?”
The girl addressed was trying, unsuccessfully,
to slump against my shoulder. At this inquiry
she sat up and opened her eyes.
“Wha’?”
A massive and lethargic woman, who had been
urging Daisy to play golf with her at the
local club to-morrow, spoke in Miss Baedeker’s
defence:
“Oh, she’s all right now. When she’s
had five or six cocktails she always starts
screaming like that. I tell her she ought
to leave it alone.”
“I do leave it alone,” affirmed the accused
hollowly.
“We heard you yelling, so I said to Doc
Civet here: ‘There’s somebody that needs
your help, Doc.’”
“She’s much obliged, I’m sure,” said
another friend, without gratitude. “But
you got her dress all wet when you stuck her
head in the pool.”
“Anything I hate is to get my head stuck
in a pool,” mumbled Miss Baedeker. “They
almost drowned me once over in New Jersey.”
“Then you ought to leave it alone,” countered
Doctor Civet.
“Speak for yourself!” cried Miss Baedeker
violently. “Your hand shakes. I wouldn’t
let you operate on me!”
It was like that. Almost the last thing I
remember was standing with Daisy and watching
the moving-picture director and his Star.
They were still under the white plum tree
and their faces were touching except for a
pale, thin ray of moonlight between. It occurred
to me that he had been very slowly bending
toward her all evening to attain this proximity,
and even while I watched I saw him stoop one
ultimate degree and kiss at her cheek.
“I like her,” said Daisy, “I think she’s
lovely.”
But the rest offended her — and inarguably,
because it wasn’t a gesture but an emotion.
She was appalled by West Egg, this unprecedented
“place” that Broadway had begotten upon
a Long Island fishing village — appalled
by its raw vigor that chafed under the old
euphemisms and by the too obtrusive fate that
herded its inhabitants along a short-cut from
nothing to nothing. She saw something awful
in the very simplicity she failed to understand.
I sat on the front steps with them while they
waited for their car. It was dark here in
front; only the bright door sent ten square
feet of light volleying out into the soft
black morning. Sometimes a shadow moved against
a dressing-room blind above, gave way to another
shadow, an indefinite procession of shadows,
who rouged and powdered in an invisible glass.
“Who is this Gatsby anyhow?” demanded
Tom suddenly. “Some big bootlegger?”
“Where’d you hear that?” I inquired.
“I didn’t hear it. I imagined it. A lot
of these newly rich people are just big bootleggers,
you know.”
“Not Gatsby,” I said shortly.
He was silent for a moment. The pebbles of
the drive crunched under his feet.
“Well, he certainly must have strained himself
to get this menagerie together.”
A breeze stirred the gray haze of Daisy’s
fur collar.
“At least they’re more interesting than
the people we know,” she said with an effort.
“You didn’t look so interested.”
“Well, I was.”
Tom laughed and turned to me.
“Did you notice Daisy’s face when that
girl asked her to put her under a cold shower?”
Daisy began to sing with the music in a husky,
rhythmic whisper, bringing out a meaning in
each word that it had never had before and
would never have again. When the melody rose,
her voice broke up sweetly, following it,
in a way contralto voices have, and each change
tipped out a little of her warm human magic
upon the air.
“Lots of people come who haven’t been
invited,” she said suddenly. “That girl
hadn’t been invited. They simply force their
way in and he’s too polite to object.”
“I’d like to know who he is and what he
does,” insisted Tom. “And I think I’ll
make a point of finding out.”
“I can tell you right now,” she answered.
“He owned some drug-stores, a lot of drug-stores.
He built them up himself.”
The dilatory limousine came rolling up the
drive.
“Good night, Nick,” said Daisy.
Her glance left me and sought the lighted
top of the steps, where Three O’clock in
the Morning, a neat, sad little waltz of that
year, was drifting out the open door. After
all, in the very casualness of Gatsby’s
party there were romantic possibilities totally
absent from her world. What was it up there
in the song that seemed to be calling her
back inside? What would happen now in the
dim, incalculable hours? Perhaps some unbelievable
guest would arrive, a person infinitely rare
and to be marvelled at, some authentically
radiant young girl who with one fresh glance
at Gatsby, one moment of magical encounter,
would blot out those five years of unwavering
devotion.
I stayed late that night, Gatsby asked me
to wait until he was free, and I lingered
in the garden until the inevitable swimming
party had run up, chilled and exalted, from
the black beach, until the lights were extinguished
in the guest-rooms overhead. When he came
down the steps at last the tanned skin was
drawn unusually tight on his face, and his
eyes were bright and tired.
“She didn’t like it,” he said immediately.
“Of course she did.”
“She didn’t like it,” he insisted. “She
didn’t have a good time.”
He was silent, and I guessed at his unutterable
depression.
“I feel far away from her,” he said. “It’s
hard to make her understand.”
“You mean about the dance?”
“The dance?” He dismissed all the dances
he had given with a snap of his fingers. “Old
sport, the dance is unimportant.”
He wanted nothing less of Daisy than that
she should go to Tom and say: “I never loved
you.” After she had obliterated four years
with that sentence they could decide upon
the more practical measures to be taken. One
of them was that, after she was free, they
were to go back to Louisville and be married
from her house — just as if it were five
years ago.
“And she doesn’t understand,” he said.
“She used to be able to understand. We’d
sit for hours ——”
He broke off and began to walk up and down
a desolate path of fruit rinds and discarded
favors and crushed flowers.
“I wouldn’t ask too much of her,” I
ventured. “You can’t repeat the past.”
“Can’t repeat the past?” he cried incredulously.
“Why of course you can!”
He looked around him wildly, as if the past
were lurking here in the shadow of his house,
just out of reach of his hand.
“I’m going to fix everything just the
way it was before,” he said, nodding determinedly.
“She’ll see.”
He talked a lot about the past, and I gathered
that he wanted to recover something, some
idea of himself perhaps, that had gone into
loving Daisy. His life had been confused and
disordered since then, but if he could once
return to a certain starting place and go
over it all slowly, he could find out what
that thing was. . . .
. . . One autumn night, five years before,
they had been walking down the street when
the leaves were falling, and they came to
a place where there were no trees and the
sidewalk was white with moonlight. They stopped
here and turned toward each other. Now it
was a cool night with that mysterious excitement
in it which comes at the two changes of the
year. The quiet lights in the houses were
humming out into the darkness and there was
a stir and bustle among the stars. Out of
the corner of his eye Gatsby saw that the
blocks of the sidewalks really formed a ladder
and mounted to a secret place above the trees
— he could climb to it, if he climbed alone,
and once there he could suck on the pap of
life, gulp down the incomparable milk of wonder.
His heart beat faster and faster as Daisy’s
white face came up to his own. He knew that
when he kissed this girl, and forever wed
his unutterable visions to her perishable
breath, his mind would never romp again like
the mind of God. So he waited, listening for
a moment longer to the tuning-fork that had
been struck upon a star. Then he kissed her.
At his lips’ touch she blossomed for him
like a flower and the incarnation was complete.
Through all he said, even through his appalling
sentimentality, I was reminded of something
— an elusive rhythm, a fragment of lost
words, that I had heard somewhere a long time
ago. For a moment a phrase tried to take shape
in my mouth and my lips parted like a dumb
man’s, as though there was more struggling
upon them than a wisp of startled air. But
they made no sound, and what I had almost
remembered was uncommunicable forever.